Refine processing expected_origins and processing steps (#719)
openid/OpenID4VP: 1.0/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Origin:
: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. The Origin MAY be any string, but will typically follow a platform-specific convention. A web origin is the combination of a scheme/protocol, host, and port, with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI for the app origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The web origin is `https://verify.example.com` with `https` being the scheme, `verify.example.com` being the host, and the port is not explicitly included as `443` is the default port for the protocol `https`. The native applications origin on some platforms will also be `https://verify.example.com` and on other platforms, may be `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.
```

Author: @fkj Just editorially, I would like to avoid having normative verbs in the terminology section for some reasons (e.g. defining test cases). Does the following work?

```suggestion
Origin:
: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. The Origin is any string, but will typically follow a platform-specific convention. A web origin is the combination of a scheme/protocol, host, and port, with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI for the app origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The web origin is `https://verify.example.com` with `https` being the scheme, `verify.example.com` being the host, and the port is not explicitly included as `443` is the default port for the protocol `https`. The native applications origin on some platforms will also be `https://verify.example.com` and on other platforms, may be `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.
```

Reviewer: Yeah, I have no strong opinion on the exact wording here.

: A model for exchanging claims, where claims are issued in the form of Credentials independent of the process of presenting them as Presentations to the Verifiers. An issued Credential may be used multiple times.

Origin:

> : An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the underlying web or application platform. For Web-based callers, the Origin is an opaque `origin` or `tuple origin` as defined in Section 7.1.1 "Origins" of [@!whatwg.html]. For native application callers, the Origin follows a platform-specific convention. Some platforms use a linked web origin, while others use a platform-specific application origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The corresponding web Origin is https://verify.example.com, where https is the scheme, verify.example.com is the host, and the port is not explicitly included because 443 is the default port for https. On some platforms, a native application uses the same Origin, while on others it uses a platform-specific value such as platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0. The Origin provided by the underlying platform is outside the scope of this specification and MUST be treated as an opaque string.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the underlying web or application platform. For Web-based callers, the Origin is an opaque `origin` or `tuple origin` as defined in the "Origins" section of [@!whatwg.html]. For native application callers, the Origin follows a platform-specific convention. Some platforms use a linked web origin, while others use a platform-specific application origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The corresponding web Origin is https://verify.example.com, where https is the scheme, verify.example.com is the host, and the port is not explicitly included because 443 is the default port for https. On some platforms, a native application uses the same Origin, while on others it uses a platform-specific value such as platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0. The Origin provided by the underlying platform is outside the scope of this specification and MUST be treated as an opaque string.
```

: A model for exchanging claims, where claims are issued in the form of Credentials independent of the process of presenting them as Presentations to the Verifiers. An issued Credential may be used multiple times.

Origin:
Origin:

> : An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. The Origin is any string, but will typically follow a platform-specific convention. A web origin is the combination of a scheme/protocol, host, and port, with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI for the app origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The web origin is `https://verify.example.com` with `https` being the scheme, `verify.example.com` being the host, and the port is not explicitly included as `443` is the default port for the protocol `https`. The native applications origin on some platforms will also be `https://verify.example.com` and on other platforms, may be `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.

Reviewer 3: We use the terms "app origin" and "web origin" here, where "app origin" can be a URI. Could we reference the relevant RFCs for clarity? WDYT @awoie @fkj?
If this suggestion is added, RFC 6454 should be added to the references at the bottom.

```suggestion
: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. The Origin is any string, but will typically follow a platform-specific convention. A web origin follows scheme, host, and port convention defined in [@!RFC6454], with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI syntax as defined by [@!RFC3986] for the app origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The web origin is `https://verify.example.com` with `https` being the scheme, `verify.example.com` being the host, and the port is not explicitly included as `443` is the default port for the protocol `https`. The native applications origin on some platforms will also be `https://verify.example.com` and on other platforms, may be `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.
```

Reviewer: I don't see why not, it might add some clarity.

Reviewer 4: I don’t think that’s the right spec. Browser and most modern URL implementations use WHATWG URL. 

Similarly, origin you probably want :
https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/browsers.html#concept-origin

Generally, please  avoid redefining what’s in other specs. Subtle wording differences can lead to confusion.

Author: See proposal below.

> : An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. The Origin is any string, but will typically follow a platform-specific convention. A web origin is the combination of a scheme/protocol, host, and port, with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI for the app origin. For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from https://verify.example.com. The web origin is `https://verify.example.com` with `https` being the scheme, `verify.example.com` being the host, and the port is not explicitly included as `443` is the default port for the protocol `https`. The native applications origin on some platforms will also be `https://verify.example.com` and on other platforms, may be `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.

Reviewer 4: I think this is all you want here, but check: 

```suggestion
: an [origin](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/browsers.html#concept-origin) or an [opaque origin](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/browsers.html#concept-origin-opaque) [[HTML]]. See [7.1.1 Origins](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/browsers.html#origin) of HTML for details. 
```

Reviewer: Good point. I think we were not previously aware that WHATWG actually defined the opaque origin as a concept. I still think it might be relevant to say that the opaque origin is platform-specific.

Reviewer 5: We should still preserve text with examples about platform-provided origin (app-to-app) imho. Even if we re-use other, existing terminology. I believe we should be more explicit here, especially with an example what a platform-provided origin could look like

Reviewer 4: Yes, a non-normative example would be great. If there’s a common one that’s already in use, all the better. However, it’s important to think about any that we know absolutely must not be allowed (e.g., file:, http:)… they don’t need to be defined here, but should be somewhere. 

something like: 
> If the url's [scheme](https://url.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-url-scheme) is a [local scheme](https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/#local-scheme), or http:, or file:, or javascript:, or ws:, or wss:, return error.

Author: Since `expected_origins` is part of the OID4VP protocol payload, OID4VP can define constraints on the values a verifier is allowed to provide there. The platform-provided origin itself is outside the scope of OID4VP and is determined by the W3C Digital Credentials API / platform layer. OID4VP can therefore only specify how the wallet compares `expected_origins` with the origin provided by the platform, and how the wallet behaves when no match is found, or the value of `expected_origins` uses an unsafe / unsupported URI scheme.

We could say something like this (wdyt @marcoscaceres @fkj @c2bo ?) :
> Values using unsafe or unsupported URI schemes, including `ftp`, `javascript`, `data`, `ws`, and `wss`, MUST NOT be used. Values using the `http` scheme MUST NOT be used unless they are explicitly allowed for constrained scenarios such as local development or equivalent non-production environments.

Author: How about the following which combines @marcoscaceres reference while including native applications as well as retaining the examples?

> Origin: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the underlying web or application platform.
> For Web-based callers, the Origin is an opaque origin or tuple origin as defined in HTML Section 7.1.1 "Origins"[HTML].
> For native application callers, the Origin follows a platform-specific convention. Some platforms use a linked web origin, while others use a platform-specific application origin.
> For example, the Verifier for the organization MyExampleOrg is served from `https://verify.example.com`. The corresponding web Origin is `https://verify.example.com`, where `https` is the scheme, `verify.example.com` is the host, and the port is not explicitly included because `443` is the default port for `https`. On some platforms, a native application uses the same Origin, while on others it uses a platform-specific value such as `platform:pkg-key-hash:Z4OFzVVSZrzTRa3eg79hUuHy12MVW0vzPDf4q4zaPs0`.
> The Origin provided by the underlying platform is outside the scope of this specification.

We could then also add a constraint on `expected_origins` as follows:
> Values using unsafe or unsupported URI schemes, including `ftp`, `javascript`, `data`, `ws`, and `wss`, MUST NOT be used. Values using the `http` scheme MUST NOT be used unless they are explicitly allowed for constrained scenarios such as local development or equivalent non-production environments.

Author: Wdyt about the above proposal @fkj @marcoscaceres @c2bo @lj-raidiam ?

Reviewer 5: That sounds good to me!

Reviewer: I think we should add that the platform-specific application origins MUST be treated as opaque origins (cf. the HTML spec).

Reviewer 5: > The Origin provided by the underlying platform is outside the scope of this specification.

I guess we could modify the last sentence along those lines?

> The Origin provided by the underlying platform is outside the scope of this specification and MUST be treated as an opaque string.

Thirdly, cross-device requests benefit from the use of secure transports with proximity checks, which are handled by the OS platform, e.g., using FIDO CTAP 2.2 with hybrid transports.

> And lastly, as part of the request, the Wallet is provided with information about the Verifier's Origin as authenticated by the trusted platform (e.g., user agent), which is important for phishing resistance.

Reviewer: Are there other trusted platforms which are not an user agent?
```suggestion
And lastly, as part of the request, the Wallet is provided with information about the Verifier's Origin as authenticated by the trusted platform (i.e. user agent), which is important for phishing resistance.
```

Author: @fkj Technically different from DC API, but we are using the same method for third-party-app verifier app sending a request via the app platform to the wallet. In this case, the trusted platform is the app platform or something in between the two apps. That is why I used "e.g.". Not sure if user agent applies in this case. Does this make sense?

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether that qualifies as an user agent either to be honest.

Thirdly, cross-device requests benefit from the use of secure transports with proximity checks, which are handled by the OS platform, e.g., using FIDO CTAP 2.2 with hybrid transports.

> And lastly, as part of the request, the Wallet is provided with information about the Verifier's Origin as authenticated by the trusted platform (i.e. user agent), which is important for phishing resistance.

Reviewer 4: Origin should link to definition

Reviewer 5: for what it's worth, OpenID specs usually don't like to Terminology like the w3c specs do

Author: This OIDF spec doesn't link to terminology.

  </front>
</reference>

> <reference anchor="whatwg.html" target="https://html.spec.whatwg.org/commit-snapshots/c560a56704e7a31887ab79299d30e6f68d696cf4/#origin">

Reviewer 4: Yeah, definitely don't do that. We (WHATWG Members) made them living for a reason.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, that is why i wasn't sure / commented on it -a lot of SDOs don't allow living standards and require some kind of pinned version

Reviewer 5: I looked at a few more examples to reference whatwg - i think something like this would be a decent compromise? https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc10008#section-6.2 

> WHATWG, "FETCH", WHATWG Living Standard, <https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/>. Commit snapshot: <https://fetch.spec.whatwg.org/commit-snapshots/3bab31a55154bda73f25b45a23df718616f2f64e/>.

> <reference anchor="whatwg.html" target="https://html.spec.whatwg.org/commit-snapshots/c560a56704e7a31887ab79299d30e6f68d696cf4/#origin">

Reviewer 4: Also, I think we want the origin concept, not the section: 
```suggestion
<reference anchor="whatwg.html" target="https://html.spec.whatwg.org#concept-origin">
```

In addition to the above-mentioned parameters, a new parameter is introduced for OpenID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API:

> * `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as an opaque string, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.

Author: ```suggestion
* `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as a string without interpretation, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.
```

> * `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as a string without interpretation, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.

Author: ```suggestion
* `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as a string, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing or interpretation of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.
```

In addition to the above-mentioned parameters, a new parameter is introduced for OpenID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API:

> * `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as a string, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing or interpretation of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.

Reviewer 4: As above.

Author: OIDF specs don't link to terminology.

In addition to the above-mentioned parameters, a new parameter is introduced for OpenID4VP over the W3C Digital Credentials API:

> * `expected_origins`: REQUIRED when signed requests defined in (#signed_request) are used with the Digital Credentials API (DC API). A non-empty array of strings, each string representing an Origin of the Verifier that is making the request. The Wallet MUST compare values in this parameter to the provided Origin, treated as a string, using simple string comparison, without any prior processing or interpretation of either the `expected_origins` values or the provided Origin, to detect replay of the request from a malicious Verifier. Values using unsafe or unsupported URI schemes, including `ftp`, `javascript`, `data`, `ws`, and `wss`, MUST NOT be used. Values using the http scheme MUST NOT be used unless they are explicitly allowed for constrained scenarios such as local development or equivalent non-production environments. If the Origin does not match any of the entries in `expected_origins`, the Wallet MUST return an error. This error SHOULD be an `invalid_request` error. This parameter is not for use in unsigned requests and therefore a Wallet MUST ignore this parameter if it is present in an unsigned request.

Reviewer 4: It's not clear what "Values using unsafe or unsupported URI schemes" are, and the current list leaves it open ended. Would it be worthwhile to just restrict to `http` and `https` for now? 

Similarly, the "Values using the http scheme MUST NOT be used unless they are explicitly allowed for constrained scenarios such as local development or equivalent non-production environments." 

That's ambiguous. I think you want to go through the "[is potentially trustworthy?](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-secure-contexts/#is-url-trustworthy)" checks of the Secure Context spec. That covers the "local development or equivalent non-production environments" case unambiguously and safely.

Reviewer 5: Since we also allow want to allow calls from other apps with an expected_origins value , we shouldn't restrict to http/https imho.

Reviewer 2: WG discussion. given that there are use-cases for app-to-app, preference is to not limit it to http/https only.

we could quote https://www.w3.org/TR/secure-contexts/#is-url-trustworthy for the cases when values are http/https. @marcoscaceres is Secure context document published? it says `[W3C Candidate Recommendation Draft](https://www.w3.org/standards/types#CRD), 10 November 2023` which means it's not a TR but URL says TR? if it's CR draft, then "These documents MUST NOT be cited as W3C standards and may or may not become W3C standards." ...

Reviewer 4: CR(Draft) are stable documents. They are Candidate Recommendations, which is the last step before Recommendation and for all intents and purposes considered stable.

-31

   * Clarify that `encrypted_response_enc_values_supported` applies only if JWE content encryption algorithm is used

>    * Clarify provided Origin is an opaque string and validation is based on simple string comparison

Author: ```suggestion
   * Clarify provided Origin is a string without prior interpretation and validation is based on simple string comparison
```
